Tunnels of knowledge: mapping today's "secrets" from yesterday's
public maps (and improving public safety)

Everyday millions of people travel by U-Bahn, Metros, subways and the
Tube.  Most travel in a blinded fashion, steered through a
brightly-lit linear maze, and unaware of where they are. Modern
society often choses actively or passively to restrict maps of
underground infrastructure, even when it is open for all. This
is in contrast to the social dynamics of the early 1900s, when
engineers were enthusiastic to share and the public eager to absorb.

OpenStreetMap is a worldwide geo-database containing a contributed and
crowdsourced vector dataset along with textual metadata, making it one
of the largest datasets available for research and analysis.  For
citizens involved with mapping transport and underground metro
systems, turning to old out-of-copyright maps allows obtaining and
rescuing information otherwise unavailable in the modern world. The
presentation will show mapping of features from the complex London
Underground system using old parliamentary maps as a basis; and
efforts for precision mapping of the Channel Tunnel using custom
software written to reproject numerical tables of engineering
azimuth/distance survey data.

Following incidents in both London and the Channel Tunnel, official
reports from the public humanities investigating the handling of the
incidents have highlighted lack of available information as a
significantly contributing factor.  Yet, other players continue to
advocate for non-publication in digital media form.  Using historical
maps via digitisation, a [citizen] transport user can proactively
enact official recommendations to improve public safety by
dissemination of information.  For myself, as an OpenStreetMap
practitioner with a background in programming and an active interest
in open knowledge, the possibility of citizen science being able to
have direct agency through the use of old maps is intriguing.
